hey everybody welcome to another episode
of impact theory on today's episode we
are joined by real life renaissance man
gary lightfoot davis award-winning
rapper actor author entrepreneur and
political figure are just a few of the
amazing accomplishments on his resume
join us as we discuss how to keep moving
forward setting aggressive timelines and
leading by example without further ado
my friends the one and only gary
lightfoot davis
absolutely absolutely glad to be here
dude it is awesome to have you hearing
your story obviously it's a very
unconventional tale of success right and
it started from something pretty
powerful walk me through what happened
with um the the financial collapse for
your family
what that led to and what your parents
taught you through that hard times is
pretty amazing
yeah i
had grown up with a father that had
shown me a grandfather that had also
shown me hard work and that through hard
work we can accomplish
providing for our family if nothing else
that we can
show them that that um
maybe we didn't have these things when
we grew up but we can give back uh if we
just get a very clear-cut idea of what
we can do uh however small that it might
be to make an impact and so for my
grandfather
it was it was way tougher
[Music]
he had a way tougher
start in school
had run away from
a very well-known indian boarding school
in oklahoma and hitchhiked back all the
way with his little brother
to
claremore oklahoma right outside of
claremore oklahoma and
um
he his whole life taught himself
resiliency and showed us resiliency that
you can do things that
will sort of help motivate other people
and my father was the beneficiary of
that he saw that it was possible to be
an entrepreneur
and then myself i would see both of
these guys
my grandfather at that point very uh
well along in his years getting up every
morning and going to work at four in the
morning
in very hot oklahoma weather in the
summer
then coming home and working all evening
in the garden and i couldn't get enough
of that i wanted to be around him as
much as i possibly could and then my
father
seeing him
do everything that he needed to do
even if it meant taking it into his own
hands to get it done and just me through
osmosis absorbing all of this and seeing
these two men do very very
great things for our family
and then
in a turn of events
we lost everything
and
it was
pretty devastating
we went from having a decent sort of
middle class life
to
really sort of having to lose our home
and end up living with my grandparents
and the burden that that put on them and
then i had to
sort of forego school for a year to get
out of that and go work
not that they forced me to do that i
just felt like look these guys have a
load on them and what can i do to help
and so i went and got a job and and
and tried to contribute the best that i
could with my paycheck to provide
groceries and food and i just
probably didn't realize it then but i
was building this feeling that i need to
do as much as i possibly can
so that we never have to go through this
situation again so that as an adult
um
things will be different for me
so i was fighting and i was fighting to
try to make sure that that
i kept moving forward and
i realized that if it was going to
happen for me i probably was going to
have to make it happen that there was
going to be no way that
somebody's going to swoop in and just
put it in my lap and that it was just
all going to be there for me so when did
you start thinking that because that's
that's a pretty incredible like moment
of awakening that shuts most people down
right but it definitely didn't shut you
down so at what age do you start
actually thinking in that way
around the time that things started to
fall apart with my parents
marriage
even in high school there was this sort
of guy that was the the it guy on the
team and and one another guy that his
father had built the stadium so you know
he was going to play
regardless of what happened uh and
regardless of how good he was so i
started to learn these lessons that it's
not always about how good you are or how
talented you are you have to work 10
times as hard to cut through some of
this and as i was going through this i
lost my grandparents
both of them within a very short period
of time so here i am i think sort of
being forged you know in the flames uh
to realize that
you really can depend on yourself
you you you of course have to have many
great people around you but i knew that
if it was going to happen for me i had
to keep moving forward and maybe that
was a stumble maybe it was a crawl maybe
it was just barely trying to put one
thing in front of the the other during
that time but i kept pushing forward i
kept moving forward and i think that's
one of the lessons i still carry forward
with me to this day when i see things
getting tough or when i see things that
seem insurmountable to other people
i know we just have to stay the course
we have to stay focused and we keep
putting one foot in front of the other
the key is to keep moving and and that's
something that i think
really was that turning point for me but
there were people that had that same
belief but they didn't make it so what
is it that people can cultivate like
right now the kid that's listening to
you that for whatever reason whether
he's native american or not he's being
told the same thing whatever you want to
do like it's ridiculous like what can
they do to make sure they've got the
fortitude to last through the whole res
tour
um yeah like how do you build that in
yourself
every experience that comes your way is
is a tool when we lost our home
and we had to go live with my
grandparents i understood that these are
just material things that that doesn't
define you it's not it doesn't make you
so when you get these challenges when
you have these things that come up in
your life continue to move forward now
how do you get to that place where you
come back and move forward and that you
become very intentional about it i just
did uh one of our footnotes that's sort
of a daily motivational inspirational
thing about baby steps
baby steps become intentional about what
it is that you're going to do
nobody in your family may have done that
nobody in your community your city your
country may have done that but if that's
what's been put here for you
take it in baby steps begin to see how
that you're going to move forward it's
exactly what i did once i came and
understood my purpose and i understood
what it is that i was supposed to be
doing i sat down and created a plan as
to how i was going to go about deploying
that and i think that's what you really
have to do and take it in baby steps
don't try to do the whole thing at once
sit it down
look at it break it down rebuild it put
it back together and then assign time
frames to everything that you want to
accomplish and break it down in phases
and then focus everything you have on
that phase how do you do that by the way
i so i heard you say this in probably
the the footnote you're talking about
where you said okay i start with where
i'm trying to get right this is my goal
and then i work backwards to where i am
today right and i identify each of those
baby steps that i have to take how how
do you do that process this is a
question i get asked a lot because i'm
totally with you that's exactly what i
do
but even like i'm not sure how to
explain that in between like how do you
get good at identifying the real
tangible steps we only know what we know
right now about what we want to do right
i mean it could be
there could be things out there that
will be so much more awesome but we just
we don't know what we don't know
and to the best of our ability what we
can say is here's where i am right now i
can put a waypoint right there i can
mark that
and i know that i want to do x
and this is that thing so if i'm going
to step back now what i've got to do is
go to work i've got to study every
single bit of that and understand every
iteration you know if it's to make an
album
so what are all the steps in making an
album from content creation to music
production to mastering to editing to
recording the record you know what are
all the the business aspects of things
that go into that who do i need to sing
on all these ten songs how many are
going to have a chorus that somebody
sings how many so i start to understand
what i have to do and what i'm going to
need other people to do and then i start
to think okay well what's the money
going to be how much do i have to put
from a money point of view into each
phase so each phase has a capital raise
that i have to ascertain all of these
other things about what am i going to do
to have to put into this to make it
become a reality and so that's where i'm
focused on once i hone in on all these
things you know yes it's to be on tour
with somebody right but first i have to
have a record i have to have an album
and do you model after somebody like if
you're trying to do an album do you find
somebody that you can get a lot of
information from
and then copy that as a starting point
or how do you do that process
i think every successful person always
looks at other successful people as
especially in their field or a field
they're endeavoring to get into
why
uh
why fix it if it's not broke you just
have to find your piece of it that you
bring to make it you but if they're
doing it and they're doing it incredibly
well sit back and look at it and find
all the ways that that you can take that
great model
fix it where you feel like it needs to
be fixed
make it you
and then can you add to it can you put
something on top of it and then you take
that and and really that's when you
start to really do the work and sit down
and study each piece of it and then you
assign the time frames i think the time
frames the timelines are the critical
piece to it because that's where so many
people go from just having
a hobby or a
dream and i'm sure many people
understand that
dreams are tough because without a time
frame a timeline they may just stay
dreams
when you assign a time frame and a plan
of action to it it can become a goal and
then it can become attainable and i
think that's what you have to do is and
then brings it makes it very present
then you have your work cut out for you
you know what you need to do and now
it's just about doing it so you exit
like really aggressive timelines or how
do you decide your timeline
very aggressive very aggressive i i
i guess it would be that old adage shoot
for the stars and if you fail then at
least you're in the clouds right right i
remember somebody telling me uh when we
were choreographing some of my first
songs
just whatever you do don't stop
because more
than
99 assuredness
nobody's gonna know it was a screw-up
unless you stop
if you keep moving
everybody's gonna think that's just you
know own it if if you were supposed to
go right and you go left then
the minute that you realize oh my god i
just went left what am i gonna do go to
the crowd and start going you know
dancing to the crowd or do they're never
gonna know that it was a mess up so yes
you have to improvise you have to adapt
you have to overcome you have to be like
water uh the great bruce lee saying that
you know you have to be uh able to
conform yourself to those situations so
that you ever don't do yourself a
disservice by not growing and not
becoming better you have to be able to
be malleable and i think that's the
greatest thing about being shaped and
having been to that place you know it
may cause you to go through some growing
pains but there's there's that's that's
awesome and at first when you go through
that you're just oh my god it hurts i
don't want to be here and i'm like oh it
hurts and complain complain complain but
if you start to look at it once you've
got through it a couple times you're
like oh here we go this is probably
going to be pretty good
oh this is going to be awesome i know
wow man this really hurts so if it's
really hurting i know it's really going
to be good on the other side of it and
you just see yourself grow and you grow
and you grow and you grow and i think
that's how you get from you know rapping
to a small group of people and then
speaking to larger audiences and
testifying to congress
wow yeah it is pretty
unbelievable like the chasm that you've
crossed in fact walk us through a little
bit of that so who are some of the
performers that you modeled yourself
after do you feel like you've learned a
lot from
and what have you learned
so i i would be remiss if i don't first
go right to michael jackson he's the man
and and he was a master
uh there will be a never another michael
jackson he just was all it and and so
when you get into you know hip-hop um
you know so many uh folks influenced me
um from from
very early on
um and then i remember all the way
forward into folks that really started
taking it um into the mainstream and you
know folks that that were really
ridiculed that were berated for their
commercial success the embassy hammer
was just ostracized because he got a
british knights shoe deal and he was a
sellout and now you can't find a rapper
that doesn't want a shoe deal yeah
they're like rushing to it no and you
can't find a record label that's not
factored in a shoe deal a clothing deal
a movie deal a commercial deal a sprite
deal you know some something deal
to promote a product or a brand
um and it's just part of what it is and
so it's very accepted today but i also
looked at you know the people that hung
on to these people and milked them drive
all their money and you know coming
coming from the hood or coming from your
struggle and you know everybody that
sort of you know and i to my degree
experienced some of that too so it
helped me as i was watching other people
and again modeling some of the mistakes
some of the things that they did do
didn't do you know getting into problems
with you know your money in general um
and so long story short just looking at
sort of the the things that the public
enemy uh was saying
um things from a political activist
standpoint because your lyrics are very
political
very much so um
people were calling you militant if i'm
not missing early when you first came
out yeah early they don't they now
they're just like wow that's so awesome
and grandma's right this is awesome like
man i wish you would have said something
people were calling me militant and an
activist and all this stuff i didn't
feel like it was militant you know and
and i say that and
my stuff was
at least even with some of the concepts
and things that um public enemy was
talking about or um
you know ex-clan or some of these you
know old-school groups that that you
know professor x and and all these guys
in in you know the
um
s1ws and everybody that was down with
public enemy
um so you know um
it was trying to really with my music
give folks some pride some understanding
to remove some of the oppression um i
think you know still to this day we
suffer from an intense amount of fear
that i think is just genetically in and
through
years of oppression built into our
community so people are very hesitant to
do anything outside of the box because
every time we've done that
we've felt the wrath and the power of
the the government and it's very tough
and again you only know what you know
right so some of my lyrics were very
very
um just cut to the point and get right
to it because at the same time i was
writing these things i was having
grandmas cry i was out in the community
seeing how people were living not just
in my community and not just the
struggles that my family was having but
i was everywhere constantly in the
community for
for years and years and years just from
one reservation to the next reservation
it would be nothing to be in three or
four reservations within 10 days and
we're doing this every year for years
and so you can't help but absorb the
struggle of everyone what does it mean
to you you've got a really powerful
saying we are the people we've been
waiting for right what does that mean
what do you hope people do with that
there's um
a prophecy that our ancestors will
return one day and so you kind of take
that at face value and you sort of think
okay so what does that mean they're like
we're gonna see a bunch of spirits
rolling up and you know they're all oh
hey i've seen you forever
um
i don't think it means that
i think
that
everything that has been done before us
is a part of us and so it's equally as
important that we do everything that we
possibly can with our life for
everything that they did for us before
we were even born
and i think that makes it even more
powerful when you think of
we can't depend on other people that
that's sort of been my through line is
i've never understood how you can be
independently codependent
you you either can be independent and
stand on your own two feet and know who
you are and what you're here for and in
the tough times
when when everything is pulling you to
do something you know that maybe
just go with the flow that's the moment
you have to be the flow and it may run
in the opposite direction of the current
that's asking you to jump in
um you talked about that with your dad
you said one thing that i learned from
my dad was never be afraid to stand
alone or maybe even be the lone wolf i
don't i might be painting that on it but
that was the image that i you could
assign both of those things to him yeah
um what does that mean like how can how
have you manifest that in your own life
you
seem the absolute embodiment of that
right so being the first native american
rapper when everybody not only is just
gonna
sort of obviously tell you that it can't
be done because that's where people
always start but this is also at a time
where you would be the
the only person who isn't
african-american being taken seriously
with minor exceptions so
like how have you in your life been not
afraid to stand alone
how has it served you like looking at
you self-published your book you created
your own record label to assign yourself
like how has it worked for you what are
lessons that you hope people will take
from that
it can be a very lonely journey
so you absolutely have to know where you
get your strength i remember walking on
the set of indian in the cupboard had
never had an acting class in my life um
and it started to dawn on me and it
becomes pretty big we're like i'm the
indian in the indian in the cupboard and
this is already a classic book this is a
huge production frank oz industrial
light and magic paramount pictures sony
studios and i'm like
does anybody know
what the hell i'm doing man
um
and i went in the sound stage and i was
first day of filming
and
i found this quiet place over off of the
set
and i just went down on one knee and i
just asked the creator to give me
everything that i needed to do what's in
front of me not everybody's work ethic
is the same
so if you don't feel like you're up to
that place right now
to run a marathon how do you start
training for a marathon by running by
running more and running more baby steps
take it as you can take it to grow and
to work those muscles develop those
muscles and if you're willing to go
through the pains and the ebbs and the
flows and and the new shoes and the
blisters and whatever you got to go
through to get to that goal you will run
that marathon it
you know you speak about the people on
the tour that couldn't make it through
here we're very focused
you know of all the people that we left
to go on that journey with
only my wife my son myself
our documentary film director and one
person made it from beginning to end
there was literally a time
where um there was somebody complaining
on the tour
and
i'll never forget this in my whole life
we were almost you know through i think
probably midway and uh
this really big guy and he was hungry
right and we hadn't had a chance to
really eat well that day but we were on
our way to it
and he was complaining about not wanting
to go anymore because he wanted to eat
now right so
my wife
went over now you got to imagine this is
a f550 really large
ford pickup truck and a big huge long 48
foot trailer
so it's it's a pretty big
tandem
and she walks over and she says um can i
have your car keys
and he says for what she's like why
don't you go get in and sit down and
i'll drive
and he just shut up
that was it he said all right so
he just turned around and went and got
in and started the car and we were ready
to go
but i think you you have to lead
you have to be willing to lead
and if you're not nobody will follow
that
and in the moments where it's most
stressful
if you don't know where you're headed if
you don't know what you're supposed to
be doing nobody else will either and you
have to be able to stay that course and
be willing to do what you need to do so
there were times where the the bus
driver that we had we think okay well
this is already hard enough on
everything else we got to do um he
didn't make it
probably
i would say he didn't make it five
thousand three thousand miles of that
54. wow
so i learned how to drive a tour bus
just to paint the picture for people the
reason that people are dropping off is
because you're having to drive through
the night you're doing multiple shows in
one day like i mean there's just
no rest for you guys to do the 211 shows
meetings
speeches
in the
single year right as much driving as you
guys have to do right it it when you
said that it was the equivalent of twice
around the earth you really get a sense
of like how far you guys are going it's
a short period of time it was really
quite
inhuman frankly and what i loved is i
heard you guys talking in another
interview where your wife said i wasn't
trying to check the guy when she took
his keys i wasn't trying to check him or
like you know get in his face about it
and the interviewer said sometimes
that's the best way to check somebody
you know to your point about leadership
you you lead by example it's not like
you're trying to make some big statement
it's just well in my world view we are
getting there they're like that's not
even an option to not go so once you
take that off the table we'll eat when
we eat
no judgment right like but i am gonna
take the keys and i'm gonna drive and
that's one of the things that i find so
fascinating about your story and one
thing reading your book that really hit
me was when you were talking about your
mom and she goes from the nice middle
class existence to being the peer of
everybody you guys lose everything
she doesn't miss a beat and she starts
working as a maid for some of
essentially her former peers and she
told you never be afraid to start over
right and
i don't even know your mom and that hit
me and i can only imagine what you took
from that how has that echoed through
your life
she led by example
i i
i
really believe what they did in their
lives
my father his work ethic my mother's
resiliency
i'm the beneficiary of all those things
i stand on their shoulders and
therefore
i can't be anything less than that
and
you know you talk about the the sort of
inhumane nature of this tour this effort
the situation out on the reservation is
that crazy
it's that
unknown to people how horrible the
conditions are
here in america
and how under the radar it is almost for
everybody
the anomaly that it is for most
everybody um how
how hard it it maybe it's almost akin to
standing
on a
island where you're the only inhabitant
wanting to be rescued or wanting
somebody to come down and provide some
assistance and you keep saying
it's an island next to an airport
you know everybody sees you must be but
nobody's going to come down and do
anything about it and yet at the same
time you see all this going out to all
these other countries and we're doing
everything for everybody else so
is it intentional
you know this must be intentional people
must intentionally not be looking down
to see that because it's right here
and so the tour was an effort to draw
over and above and beyond
the attention
not just from outside of indian country
but for indian country again leading
through example i'm going to make this
an example of if
some some folks i'm not a tribe i don't
have all that funding i don't have all
of these things but if if
you know a couple
uh their family
can go out and garner enough support to
be able to execute and deploy and
logistically do this whole effort
what is our bigger excuse to not do this
if if a few people can make this happen
collectively what could we do
and it was to really say that as well
and in order to say that you have to be
willing to do more you have to be
willing to take a stand and make a
difference um
almost on an epic scale just sometimes
to get people's attention and i think
that's really what it was about um
but going back again you know to do
something like that to to have the
resiliency to believe in yourself
um going to see
my mom
uh at a home
where she was you know cleaning a toilet
um to know that when i was going to
school
she was cleaning those toilets to help
pay the tuition for me to be able to go
when a lot of the kids theirs parents
were doctors or you know because she
wanted me to have a better education she
wanted me to have a better chance
and and also the things that i would
have to do every saturday to go work
at this ladies house that helped pay the
other part of my tuition
i learned nothing's free
everything has a
price
one way or the other that you have to
pay for it
and
understanding that early on
and coming to terms with that helped me
i think um
navigate my journey talk a lot about
self-belief
how can
people cultivate that
you know it's it's interesting you say
that because literally
one of the issues that i think that
we're dealing with
more
in indian country right now than ever
before is knowing our value knowing our
worth
if
you don't love you
you can't love anybody else if you don't
appreciate you it's impossible to
appreciate anybody if you don't respect
yourself it's impossible to respect
somebody else and if you are absorbed
with that
really what it is is hatred of self
and and however you got there through
trauma or oppression
or
you know sort of genetic
uh historical trauma
um
it becomes a situation that can be so
devastating um not just in
the lives of individuals but in
communities
and we have that trauma
absolutely
one of the biggest challenges right now
for us to really stand up and come
together as a community i believe
is the the need for our people to
realize their purpose and their value
and and to come to terms with
who we are and the beauty of our culture
and and the beauty of the life that we
have and
that self-worth
manifests and grows and i think it's
very contagious and that's one of the
things that sometimes people say well
these are just words or these are just
things that you're saying and don't put
a very high price on motivation or
inspiration but if you don't have hope
if you don't believe that there's
possibility for you
well then you do start to understand why
we have the highest rates of suicide why
we have the the highest college uh
the highest high school dropout rates
the lowest college attendance
um you know i think right now we have
less than than 1 000
tribally enrolled attorneys right now in
2017 in the united states um i think we
have less than
250 certified public account accountants
that are enrolled tribal members i you
mean look at the doctors look at you the
whole scope begins to be almost
unattainable i know you and your wife
have started talking about actually
getting into filmmaking being on the
other side to tell stories
what so when i put that in conjunction
with
helping
anybody but native americans
specifically see a sense of self-worth
get a picture of what's possible
one why do you think that filmmaking
will be effective which is something my
entire life is built around
and then two what are the kinds of
stories i know some of it is
we just want them to see people playing
normal roles a dad regardless of the
fact that absolutely right but what's
that other thing like you talk a lot
about the warrior spirit like
is there something are there stories
that you want to tell people that impart
a certain like life code that you want
people to internalize
you know i think
sharing stories of course in our culture
culture is is how things were passed
down how historical events were passed
down how we learned from each other my
grandfather talking to me every day in
the garden when i was working with him
is how i learned a lot about who i am
today and who he was and who he is
i think when we look at these mediums
that are more accessible and more viable
than they've ever been before um
you know with with access to reaching
people we have to be out there telling
our story we can't let other people tell
our story for us and continue to not
have the ownership of of who we are and
i think we just have to do that and
again hopefully that's leading by
example because we don't have all the
access in the world to doing these
things but i know that it's meaningful
so at the end of it at the end of the
day we start with is it meaningful
absolutely that's meaningful the power
of of our people seeing somebody uh on
tv uh on film
playing a role that is just a a person
that's just a story that they see
that's there the power of that can
impact and change folks whole idea of
what is possible you've got such a big
mission in front of you and it's really
amazing and you've clearly got the
willingness to put in all the hard work
but how do you think about failure what
do you teach your kids about failure do
you see it as a teaching mechanism
something to be afraid of like how do
you conceptualize of that in your life
failures are our greatest teachers um
i don't think anybody that's ever
endeavored to ever do anything
didn't fail at some point in some aspect
of what they were trying to do
we learn from it and we move forward
how do you keep it so your your dad used
to say
that one of the things he had gotten
good at and he wanted you to get good at
was not letting the um the energy of a
negative situation or confrontation to
carry you away so how do people in that
moment of failure which is usually
really embarrassing and like when you're
failing like all the talk in the world
if you're caught up in the energy
it it's just it sucks so much people
just want to turn and run in the
opposite direction so how did you learn
not to get caught up in that energy
i
we're people
and
we feel how people feel
meaning
it hurts when people say bad things
about us
it doesn't feel good when people don't
believe in you
my dad always told me
if something ever doesn't go the way
that you've planned and you find
yourself in that situation don't panic
the most important thing you can do is
stay calm stay present and i've always
sort of liken i can't remember which you
know i think it was a vietnam war film
or some other film that i was watching
one time
and this sergeant stood right up in the
middle of this battle
and bullets are hitting branches and
knocking trees down you can hear him
zipping by and he stands up and he says
hey
go over there move up
do you
you need to
watch right over there
and the presence amidst all the chaos
and destruction and calamity
was what saved all of their lives
and i think that presence of mind and
that being able to be calm
that you've laid a plan out you've
done what you've done that got you to
this point
if something comes up that you didn't
expect or that you didn't know was going
to come your plan is not bad it got you
to where you are
right now you have to deal with what's
in front of you that doesn't mean run
away doesn't mean stop and don't do
anything it means deal with it
deal with what's in front of you move
through it move around it move over it
move under it but keep moving forward
rectify the situation regroup and go
so i've got a somewhat ridiculous way of
practicing this because i'm such a huge
believer that you have to learn how to
do that because i think naturally you're
saying we're people right so naturally i
think people just kick over into the
sympathetic nervous system fight or
flight they freeze blood is literally
leaving their prefrontal cortex they're
not able to process things
so
i started playing first-person shooter
video games
as a way to practice because on the
other end of that computer is a 14 year
old who wants to say horrible things
about my mother
and i've got to in that moment learn
like how to just literally
not get caught up in the emotion like
literally not get caught up in the
emotion lower my heart rate slow my
breathing like find that calm in the
center of that storm it's like in in
that moment you have to go the opposite
way of what your body's telling you and
learning to go the opposite way so
whether it's everything's heightened
you're panicking like dude i can't
imagine testifying before congress like
i've worked pretty hard not to get like
really nervous that would freak me out
so
go your body wants to amp up right and
you've got to find a way to bring it
back down so i'm looking at your son
over there and i'm thinking what are you
telling him to do to practice that is it
hey life is going to present that and in
that moment don't think of it as a
performance or are there things that he
that you try to put situations you try
to put him in where he can practice
going the opposite way of what his body
wants like how does he prepare now for
what will happen tomorrow
as you were talking
one of the things my mom used to tell me
also was run to the roar
i love that run to the roar um
i love that that came from your mom
that's something you'd expect from a
father
yeah no she she was very she was you
know she would sit me down and she would
talk to me about this and she would say
um
there's always going to be hard times
and
you just have to have belief
in
that where you are is where you're
supposed to be
and by moving forward the strength of
your faith
will unleash
the power of the creator in your life
and i've seen that happen so many
different times and
the
i can keep going back to it
when you see that happen
when when you see a man go out and talk
to a storm and the storm goes away you
can't unsee that you can't unknow that
what's something about
entrepreneurship that you
want to teach people because ah man it's
so clear hearing the way that you talk
that there's so much like
entrepreneurial thinking woven through
the way that you see the world the way
that you approach things absolutely what
do you think people would benefit from
learning or understanding about
being a real entrepreneur
it's the most
rewarding
hardest
most beautiful
liberating journey you'll ever go on
and
i don't know of anything much more
fulfilling
than to see a possibility or an
opportunity
when nobody else sees it maybe
or see a piece of it that's already
existent and say wow
i could do that
and then take that
and breathe life into it through your
hard work your efforts your passion
and see it not only help you but help
other people
there is nothing there is nothing i can
think of that's more rewarding than that
every time somebody says to me
when you came here on tour you you hel
or i was
i was thinking about killing myself and
when i heard what you said
it changed my life every bit of being
day one doing anything i was doing that
let me ultimately do it impact that
person's life
everything has been worth it
the fact that there's kids in germany
that listen to my music and learn about
indian people
everything has been worth it
so i guess that's the most beautiful
thing is that when you have the ability
to do something that maybe other people
haven't ever identified as
a tangible and you you can help people
see that and then glean from it what it
means to them
that's just that's just the ultimate end
result for me and what are a few tools
that you think will
universally prepare people to actually
be an entrepreneur to not just talk
about it not just have the dream like
you're saying like what are what are
some tools that people need to cultivate
planning
um planning i think absolutely your
confidence you know whatever you got to
do to really continue to build your
confidence and continue to craft uh the
value that you confidence comes from
i think confidence comes from
[Music]
doing trying
failing
correcting
and then doing trying failing correcting
doing trying failing or if it's not your
own journey hopefully it's not
doing
your work enough to look at what you're
going to to get involved in or people
around you and identifying where other
people are having a hard time and
correcting off of their mistakes
um
i mean you don't wish anybody bad you
don't want to see anybody fail but if
you can look at that situation and say
wow i know that when i do x i need to
kind of be prepared to move right and
take two steps forward
let me file that one
so being aware being aware of whatever
it is that you're going to get into or
whatever is passionate about you but i
think that you really have to understand
that if it's your dream and that you're
moving forward to accomplish your dream
don't let anyone ever take that from you
don't let anyone kill your passion about
what it is that you feel innately is
what you're supposed to do what your
journey is that's yours that that that
that's almost been ordained to you
specifically uniquely that you may be
the one person that's able to move that
forward don't let anybody rob you of
that and it's going to happen people are
going to doubt you people are going to
and as you mentioned you know there's
going to be people that just don't see
it they just don't get it and and it
sucks i mean it's it's hard to to
maintain that excitement i think the the
other thing right there in that window
is you know absolutely uh
be about it if you expect other people
to be about it
if you if you want people to be 100
excited understand you got to be 150
excited about it
nobody is ever going to be more excited
about what you're doing than you so you
better be on fire about it if you walk
in with your head down or you don't feel
that this is something that you really
at the core of your being believe in
then you're not ready to walk in there
yet
don't go until you know it better than
one
no then no one else that you know it
better than anybody else on this earth
that's vital you have to know what
you're doing you have to know every bit
of it to the best of your ability so
that you can talk about it because the
minute they see you flinch the minute
that they see you not know or you start
to make it up as you go i think that's
where people start to lose confidence in
who you are what you're about what
you're talking about you have to be able
to to walk in and and
and i think that all comes with knowing
uh your service your product what it is
that you're doing your story better than
anybody else could ever tell it and
being on fire about it and you don't
have to if it's really your passion it's
really that it's just going to come out
of you
but a lot of people maybe have to work
on that skill more than other people
right
and i think that you know get in the
mirror
get your wife
get your uncle get anybody to let you
listen uh that'll let you talk to them
and listen and and maybe help tell you
hey look i i didn't really believe that
too much you know maybe well where did
where did you stop believing me what did
i not communicate enough and just go
through the iterations do the work
practice um whatever it is that you've
got that you want to communicate to
folks and i think that's that's a
communication you know i think back
about my dad said i said it earlier be
able to speak be able to to know what
you're trying to say
and if you can communicate to people if
you can speak and talk
about your idea
you know
that's the key to it all right you've
got to be able to express and and i
think there's so many things people will
find as they begin that journey that
they didn't even know they had but you
got to take one step and i think that's
where people fail as they don't start
wow
yes
that that i will agree with you on what
what would you say i love when people
have kids because it really like
clarifies what their beliefs are what
would you say if your son came to you
and said
i just don't know how to start
um
if my son came to me and said i don't
know how to start i would say to him
do you really believe in what it is that
you're trying to start to do yes
if if you got to start there do you
believe in it does
do you know why you're doing it does it
have purpose and meaningfulness to you
because if he's saying he can't attach
to it or he can't find the
the place to to to move forward to me
he hasn't found the thing yet
um
i would encourage him to keep looking
and um
and searching for it before i asked my
last question where can these guys find
you online
they can find us online at lightfoot
l-i-t-e-f-o-o-t dot com
and uh of course all the social media
facebook
instagram um
my wife would kill me if i don't say
snapchat
um i do my best on snapchat um but yeah
um we uh
twitter everything so yeah
all right youtube i'd be remiss yes true
youtube.com
many of your youtube videos yes sir
so what's the impact that you want to
have on the world
the impact that i would
want to have on the world would be
for people to understand
that their life is not a mistake
that their life isn't just because
that they've been put here for a reason
that we're all here for a purpose
none of us
were put here to do nothing
and
i would never want to see anybody come
here for the window of time that we're
here
which ultimately is very short no matter
how long we live
and not find that
because really for me life
is contained within that
living is contained within that
um
and through that
i would want them to understand that
we're here to live not survive
i think too many people survive every
single day
and
not enough of us live
and i wouldn't want anybody to come here
and do an 80-year bid and just survive
we should all spend every second that we
possibly can living
thank you so much for being on the show
that was amazing thank you thank you
guys you want to talk about somebody
that has definitely lived their life and
however much time this man ends up
getting every bit of it has been used
wisely this is a story an incredible
story of hard work perseverance he once
said if you're going to ask somebody to
do 10 push-ups you better do 50. and
that i think really sums up what he's
learned the incredible way that he's
drawn from his family the lessons that
he's learned from hardship seeing his
mother in failure only thinking about
moving forward and reinventing herself
and whether people were judging her or
judging him her encouragement was always
to never let anybody else define you and
what you're capable of and a story that
we didn't even get to when he goes back
he used to be a busboy he meets another
kid who's busboying and
sees him being mistreated by other
people goes up to him gives him a
hundred dollar tip and tells the kid
don't ever let anybody else define you
and give you your worth
that's something you have to define for
yourself and that is something that goes
through everything that he puts out all
the content that he creates whether it's
the raps which go listen to they're
amazing especially if you grew up when i
grew up it is amazing to hear
the lyrical prowess to hear the things
that he's talking about to hear somebody
that was political long before many
people if anybody was being political
it's really really fascinating
hard work
gets you an outcome this man's life is
absolutely proof of that and just to see
how far he's gone from rapping about the
reservation all the way to lobbying on
capitol hill it is an absolutely
breathtaking journey that i think you
guys will learn a lot
so if you haven't already be sure to
subscribe and until next time my friends
be legendary take care
thank you so much
[Applause]
you